indium is a really fascinating material
and we're going to show you why it was
called indium how you can move things
out of it and how you can do some
reactions and Neil's going to have some
real fun Neil has quite a few samples of
indium because it is a slightly
poisonous element and people give it to
him rather than having to dispose of it
themselves and so he has selection of
pieces of rods and wires and a really
quite nice thick wire that was
originally coiled and he showed how you
can just pull the coil apart and even
this thick wire is so bendy that when
you put your hands together it just
bends with almost no effort at all
indium wire it's very very malleable
very very soft and very easy to form
into shapes but what was really nice was
they made a ball of this wire and then
thumped it with a hammer you know Neil
has a big selection of hammers and
produced quite a nice flat sheet these
pieces of wire essentially cold molded
together and as soon as I saw the sheet
I thought we should try and make an
impression of a coin
so I produced a British 20 pence piece
which has a nice picture of Her Majesty
the Queen and put it on the indium
and Neil hit it with a hammer
of course he hit the side with not the
Queen's picture on it out of respect and
we got a very nice impression of the
Queen on the second attempt it was even
nicer though he did bend my coin and
it's really remarkable how much detail
can be pressed into this soft metal you
can even see her earring I didn't know
the Queen wore an earring I've never
looked at her portraits in such detail
then because we have many viewers in the
United States we felt it was only right
to do an impression of an American coin
so we chose 1/4 Neal conveniently had
one hanging on the wall of his office
and that also produced an impression but
not quite as beautiful as the impression
of her Majesty but then it was time to
do slightly more serious experiments and
one of the things about indium and the
reason why I've used it in my career is
that it has really quite a low melting
point just above a hundred and fifty
degrees centigrade and it can be used
for soldiering things we therefore
wanted to demonstrate how easily you can
melt it so Neal put quite a large amount
of indium into a boiling tube heated it
up and you can watch it melting and then
when he melted he thought it was pity to
waste the liquid metal he poured it into
a little mold and made a soft hemisphere
of indium and once he got it out being
Neal he couldn't resist the hammer again
and so he hammered it again almost flat
when I was using indium as solder for my
research I was soldiering gold
thermocouples thermocouples for
measuring very low temperature and I
remembered that when I was doing this
sometimes the gold would melts because
the indium alloyed with the gold and
caused it to melt which of course ruined
the thermocouple so I had a small piece
of gold thermocouple wire left I found
in my cupboard in here and I wanted Neal
to dissolve it in his liquid indium
first of all we made a mistake because
we forgot that there was varnish on the
wire but he burnt that off and even so
we never got it to work I don't know
whether I was particularly clumsy when I
was a student using indium solder or we
were doing something else wrong but it
was a bit of disappointment however the
next experiment was really good many of
you may think that the element indium
was named after the country India I'm
here in India in Mumbai what used to be
called Bombay behind me is the gateway
to India because there lots of elements
named after countries or states
californium gallium germanium and so on
in fact it turns out the indium was
named after a color the color indigo
which is the sort of violet color that
you see in rainbows when indium was
first discovered it was discovered
actually as a line in a spectrum of
violet line before they had isolated any
of the metal so Neel decided that we
should try and seed this violet color
this indigo color and we tried to
experiments
the first one was just to take a
crucible with India minutes to heat the
Indian map till it melted and then put a
blowtorch on it that is a
high-temperature gas flame and see what
we could see and there was a really nice
indigo color Brady was really excited
unfortunately that was just the time I
chose to go out of the room to a meeting
so I missed it you got it baby actually
they didn't see the color straightaway
but they had to heat the Indian pretty
hard and then the color appeared I think
the reason is that the color comes from
atoms not very many atoms in the gas
phase so you've got to heat the Indian
map to a very high temperature and once
it is in the gas phase it is hot enough
for the electrons to be excited in the
atoms and then when these electrons
return to their original level they give
out light it is a characteristic of
indium that because of the energy levels
that the light comes out that this very
characteristic violet indigo color which
other elements don't produce so it was
quite easy for the German discoverers of
the element to notice that there was
something new unusual this unusual line
then I suggested that Neal to tried
dissolving indium in bromine the reason
being that most indium salts are
colorless and bromine is red so I
thought it would look nicer on the video
it looked nice but the indium didn't
dissolve so it was a bit of a
disappointing experiment so it was good
I wasn't there but Neal is a huge
believer in nitric acid to dissolve
almost anything except gold so he poured
concentrated nitric acid on the indium
and was not disappointed great babbling
bubbles of no2 the brown gas and the
indium at least partly dissolved the
indium is dissolving and making indium
nitrate that's indium 3 plus ions and
no.3 minus ions we never isolated the
indium nitrate but because I hadn't been
there new thoughts he would try and show
me the color again this time he took
some wooden splints these are just very
thin bits of wood and dipped it into the
nitric acid solution which now contained
indium ions and put that in the flame
and you could see the nice indigo color
I'd never seen that before and so it was
really quite an exciting first I still
think the purple color of plutonium's 3
salts a nicer but we can't do plutonium
in Neil's lab yet so indium is a good
substitute professor of many other
elements named after colours well
iridium is named after its many coloured
salts rather like the English word
iridescent and I believe that rhodium is
also named after the red colour of one
of its salts and I'm sure our viewers
will remind me of lots of other elements
that are named after colours but I can't
think of any immediately there's a
really important use for indium which is
in almost any sort of computer display
screen which consists of liquid crystals
or some similar materials sandwiched
between two pieces of glass obviously
you have to be able to see through the
glass or you won't see the display but
the glass the inside surface of the
glass has to conduct electricity
otherwise you cannot activate the pixels
so what happens is that the glass is
coated
with a material called indium tin oxide
I sent emails all over the university to
try and find sample of glass with indium
tin oxide and they neil said i've got a
big piece so i needn't have bothered i
could have just as neil what you see is
there's a sheet of glass which has a
thin coating of indium tin oxide on one
side and not on the other if you take a
meter that measures electrical
resistance you can see that on the glass
side doesn't conduct electricity at all
on the other side where there's the
indium tin oxide as you move the probes
of the meter apart you can see the
resistance goes up and down and it does
conduct electricity doesn't conduct it
terribly well but it's transparent and
it does conduct enough for displays
there is quite a serious problem in
terms of sustainability
where are the computer screens going to
come for your children your
grandchildren because the supplies of
indium are beginning to run out so it's
really very important that when you
finish with your LCD screen when you
finish with your computer your
smartphone you should get it recycled so
people can begin to reclaim these
elements or you may find that when you
get to your iPhone xx or iPhone 30 there
won't be enough indium to be put on the
screens obviously we try to bring you as
much chemistry as possible here in our
videos but if you really want to fill
your boots well why not check out the
great courses plus have a look at this
60 half-hour lessons with the Georgetown
University expert all about chemistry
everything's here essentially it's
guiding you through a full college-level
chemistry curriculum and this is just
one of an ever growing library of
courses they have covering all sorts of
subjects you name it they're going to
have a no tests no homework just the
lots of knowledge you can do them on
your computer tablet phone whatever for
a free trial go to the great courses
plus comm slash periodic videos so they
know you came from here should be on the
screen down in the description check
them out people and now thanks to them
for supporting this video
[Music]